healthdirect australia logoHealthdirectFree Australian health advice you can count on. 
Home
COVID-19
Health topics A-Z 
Medicines
Symptom checker
Service finder
Search our site


beginning of content
Healthy eating for children
6-minute read

 Print  Share  Save

Listen
Key facts
Healthy eating in childhood reduces your child’s chance of developing health problems as they get older.
A healthy, balanced diet includes foods from all 5 food groups: fruit, vegetables, grains, proteins and dairy.
Foods high in sugar, saturated fat and salt aren’t necessary for a healthy diet and should be limited.
Cooking and eating healthy foods together as a family can help your child develop healthy eating habits for life.
If your child has specific dietary needs or restrictions, your doctor or dietician can help you make sure their diet is healthy and balanced.
On this page
What is healthy eating?
How much food does my child need?
How can I encourage healthy eating habits?
Which foods should I limit in my child’s diet?
What if my child is intolerant or allergic to certain foods?
Who can I talk to for advice and support?
Related information on Australian websites
What is healthy eating?
Healthy eating is essential for your child's good health, growth and development. Healthy eating in childhood means they will have less chance of developing chronic diseases like heart disease, type 2 diabetes, obesity and some cancers. It will also mean they feel better and enjoy life more.

To stay healthy and maintain a healthy weight, children need to be physically active and eat the right amount of nutrients to balance the energy they use.

The Australian Dietary Guidelines recommend children should enjoy a wide variety of foods from these 5 food groups:

fruit
vegetables, legumes and beans
cereals (including breads, rice, pasta and noodles), preferably wholegrain
lean meat, fish, poultry and/or alternatives
milks, yoghurts, cheeses and/or alternatives (children under 2 should have full-fat milk, but older children and adolescents can have reduced-fat varieties)
illustration of food groups
Healthy eating from the 5 food groups (above) is essential for all children.
Children should limit their intake of foods that contain saturated fat, added salt or added sugar. They should also be encouraged to choose water to drink.

How much food does my child need?
Children need to eat more as they grow. As a guide, your child should eat these foods every day:

2 to 3 years: 1 serve of fruit; 2½ serves of vegetables; 4 serves of grains; 1 serve of meat/poultry; 1½ serves of dairy
4 to 8 years: 1½ serves of fruit; 4½ serves of vegetables; 4 serves of grains; 1 ½ serves of meat/poultry; 1½ to 2 serves of dairy
9 to 11 years: 2 serves of fruit; 5 serves of vegetables; 4 to 5 serves of grains; 2½ serves of meat/poultry; 2½ to 3 serves of dairy
12 to 13 years: 2 serves of fruit; 5 to 5 ½ serves of vegetables; 5 to 6 serves of grains; 2 ½ serves meat/poultry; 3 ½ serves dairy
How can I encourage healthy eating habits?
Teaching your child how to eat healthily now means they will be more likely to make their own healthy choices as they get older. Here are some tips to encourage healthy eating habits:

Sit together as a family at mealtimes, without any screens.
Make healthy foods fun, for example by cutting fruit or sandwiches into interesting shapes.
Serve a variety of seasonal fruits and vegetables.
Learn together about how different foods are grown.
Let your children help with food shopping and preparation.
Try new foods and recipes.
Limit the amount of junk food you keep in the house.
Keep a bowl of fruit handy for snacks.
Which foods should I limit in my child’s diet?
Some foods are not essential in children's diets. These are called 'discretionary foods' and are generally high in kilojoules, saturated fat, added sugars or added salt.

While it’s okay to eat small amounts of discretionary foods occasionally as part of a balanced diet, you should try to limit these foods in your child’s daily diet. Eating large amounts of discretionary foods can lead to children becoming overweight or developing diseases in later life.

Examples of foods to limit are:

sweet biscuits, cakes and desserts
processed meats and sausages
ice-cream, confectionery and chocolate
store-bought burgers, pizza, hot chips, and fried foods
crisps and other fatty and/or salty snacks
cream and butter
sugar-sweetened cordials and soft drinks
Here are some tips to help you limit foods for children:

Instead of using a lot of butter, cooking margarine, cream or coconut or palm oil, choose vegetable oils, spreads, nut butters/pastes and avocado.
Read labels and always choose low-salt options.
Don't add salt to foods during cooking or at the table.
Offer water rather than sugary soft drinks, cordial, energy drinks or sports drinks.
What if my child is intolerant or allergic to certain foods?
It may be more difficult to eat a wide variety of healthy foods if your child is allergic or intolerant to certain foods, such as lactose in dairy products. Your doctor or dietitian can advise you about how to manage food allergies or intolerances while maintaining a healthy diet.

Who can I talk to for advice and support?
Visit the Pregnancy, Birth and Baby website for a healthy eating guide for kids to help you make the right choices.

Sources:
Australian Government - NHMRC (Healthy eating for children), Australian Government – NHMRC (Australian Dietary Guidelines), Healthy Kids Association (Food allergies & intolerances)
Learn more here about the development and quality assurance of healthdirect content.

Last reviewed: May 2022


Back To Top
We value your feedback
Was this article helpful?

Need more information?
These trusted information partners have more on this topic.


General search results

Results for medical professionals
Top results

Healthy eating habits for children
Teaching children healthy food habits will help them make the best choices for themselves as they grow up.

Read more on Pregnancy, Birth & Baby websitePregnancy, Birth & Baby
Healthy eating habits for children | Raising Children Network
Healthy eating habits for kids include healthy food and opportunities to eat it. Healthy eating routines and messages can help with overeating or undereating.

Read more on raisingchildren.net.au websiteraisingchildren.net.au
Teenage nutrition & healthy eating | Raising Children Network
In this video, parents and teenagers share their views on nutrition and healthy eating, including school lunch boxes, takeaway food, and being vegetarian.

Read more on raisingchildren.net.au websiteraisingchildren.net.au
Healthy eating habits teens | Raising Children Network
Teens need healthy food but might make unhealthy food choices. Encourage healthy eating habits with role modelling and a positive food environment at home.

Read more on raisingchildren.net.au websiteraisingchildren.net.au
Pregnancy healthy eating in pictures | Raising Children Network
Healthy eating for pregnancy means lots of fruit, vegetables and foods with calcium, protein and iron. Avoid sugary, fatty foods, and drink plenty of water.

Read more on raisingchildren.net.au websiteraisingchildren.net.au
Healthy eating throughout all of life | Eat For Health
The Australian dietary guidelines will help people of all ages make the best food and drink choices for good health and avoid health problems. However, there are also some special messages for people at different stages of life because their bodies are changing. Healthy eating for infants, children and teenagers Infants, children and teenagers have special food needs because they are growing and developing. They also need extra energy for playing and being more active.

Read more on NHMRC – National Health and Medical Research Council websiteNHMRC – National Health and Medical Research Council
Healthy eating and exercise for parents | Raising Children Network
Keeping healthy and fit is good for you and good for your children. Eat foods from the five food groups and fit physical activity into everyday activities.

Read more on raisingchildren.net.au websiteraisingchildren.net.au
Healthy eating
Choosing a healthy diet with plenty of food variety can help you feel good and reduce your risk of developing chronic health problems.

Read more on WA Health websiteWA Health
Healthy eating habits teens | Raising Children Network
Teens need healthy food but might make unhealthy food choices. Encourage healthy eating habits with role modelling and a positive food environment at home.

Read more on raisingchildren.net.au websiteraisingchildren.net.au
Food - Healthy eating for toddlers | Sydney Children's Hospitals Network
Toddlers like to show their independence by making their own decisions

Read more on Sydney Children's Hospitals Network websiteSydney Children's Hospitals Network
SHOW MORE
Related pages
Healthy eating over 60
Healthy food swaps
How to eat healthily on a budget
The truth about exercise and eating junk food!
Search our site for
Nutrition GuidelinesHealthy LifestyleNutritional Requirements
Symptom checker
Worried about your health?

Select a symptom, answer some questions, get advice.

START YOUR SYMPTOM CHECK
service category
Find a health service
GP (General practice) Pharmacy Emergency Departments Hospitals
Need more services?

enter a location
Enter a location
Enter postcode or town
Use current location SEARCH
Healthdirect 24hr 7 days a week hotline
24 hour health advice you can count on

 1800 022 222

Government Accredited with over 140 information partnersHealthdirect logo
We are a government-funded service, providing quality, approved health information and advice

Australian Government, health department logo ACT Government logo New South Wales government, health department logo Northen Territory Government logo Government of South Australia, health department logo Tasmanian government logo Victorian government logo Government of Western Australia, health department logo
About
How we can help
Our mobile app
Linking to us
Information partners
Register your service
Terms of use
Privacy
Contact us
About us
Discover
Blog
BMI calculator
Health apps
Medicines
Service finder
Symptom checker
download from the App store download from google play

   

healthdirect's information and advice are developed and managed within a rigorous clinical governance framework.

This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

Healthdirect Australia acknowledges the Traditional Owners of Country throughout Australia and their continuing connection to land, sea and community. We pay our respects to the Traditional Owners and to Elders both past and present.

Listen
Dictionary
Translate

College Rankings
show submenu for College Rankings
Student Resources
show submenu for Student Resources
School Profiles
show submenu for School Profiles
Career Resources
show submenu for Career Resources
News
Research
Bootcamps
Search Programs
The Student’s Guide to Choosing a Major
Confused about how to choose a college major? Or feel like picking a major is stressing you out? Read our guide to get the help you need.
portrait of Staff Writers
by Staff Writers
 Edited by Hannah Muniz and Lorraine Mumby
 Reviewed by Sarah Holliday, MS
Updated September 26, 2022
Learn more about our editorial process

5 min read
undefinedClose
Share this Article
Facebook
Twitter
Linkedin
Email
Copy Link
Knowing what you're interested in and what you're good at can help you choose a major.
Talk with your academic advisor to learn more about your degree options.
Many colleges let you create your own major so you can study a more niche subject that interests you.

Listen to this article:

Audio Player

00:00
00:00

Use Up/Down Arrow keys to increase or decrease volume.
Choosing a major can be tricky, especially if you have multiple passions or don't know what kind of career you want.

Advertisement
Ready to Start Your Journey?
I want my
Select a degree
In
Select a category
Focusing on
Select a subject
Search Programs
The reality is that many students change their majors. According to a 2020 BestColleges study, 3 in 5 college grads would change their majors if they could go back.

Before you commit to a major, you should consider several factors, including the program cost, your salary expectations, and the employment rates in that field of study. In addition, you should think about your personality, your academic and professional goals, and your interests.

Here, we help you choose a major that resonates with your personal mission, values, and passions.


6 Key Factors to Consider When Choosing a Major
Choosing a major represents a significant step in the college process, and it shouldn't be taken lightly. Here are six factors to consider before choosing a major.

1. What Are Your Biggest Priorities?
Some students pursue certain majors primarily based upon salary potential and job demand. Other students choose majors they're passionate about or highly skilled in.

Before you choose a major, think about which of these three factors — economic advantage, interest level, and ability — are most important and relevant to you and your goals.

2. What Are You Interested In?
Studies have found that students tend to perform better in school when they can focus on their interests. Unfortunately, it's not always easy for people to identify their interests.

To get help with this, consider taking a personality quiz. For example, the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator questionnaire can help you determine subjects that closely align with your personality and interests.

This popular assessment uses your habits and attitudes to generate one of 16 personality types, written as a combination of four letters. Examples include ISFJ (introverted, sensing, feeling, and judging) and ENTP (extroverted, intuitive, thinking, and perceiving).

You can also explore potential areas of study and career paths by joining student clubs, volunteering, working a part-time job on campus, managing a side hustle, or completing an internship.

3. What Are You Good At?
Understanding your natural skills and talents can go a long way in helping you make an informed and confident decision when choosing a major.

It may be your parents' dream for you to be an artist, but what if you skew more toward business or science? Just because someone else has a degree path in mind doesn't mean it's right for you.

One way to determine which academic fields best suit you is to take a close look at your high school grades and your ACT or SAT scores. Doing this can highlight your strengths in specific academic areas.

4. What Are the Highest-Paying Fields?
When considering which major to pursue, determine how important salary and salary potential weigh into your decision-making process. If you're motivated by high earnings, pursuing a degree in a STEM-related field may appeal to you.

That said, some students care more about the importance of their work than the salary offered; they don't want a job just for the money. Popular non-STEM majors include human services, education, and visual or performing arts.

The Bureau of Labor Statistics provides a regularly updated list of positions offering the highest salaries. Psychiatrists rank high on this list, as do other healthcare professionals like oral and maxillofacial surgeons, obstetricians and gynecologists, and general internal medicine physicians.

If you want a job outside health and medicine, positions with high salaries include chief executive, physicist, computer and information systems manager, and architectural and engineering manager.

5. How Rigorous Will the Coursework Be?
Some majors may feel harder than others due to factors like the heaviness of homework loads, course expectations, and the frequency of exams. Classes in your major will make up a significant portion of your college course load. Before you declare a major, make sure you understand how rigorous your weekly workload will be.

Indiana University Bloomington's 2016 National Survey of Student Engagement determined the most difficult majors based on the average time students spent per week preparing for classes. The hardest majors included architecture, chemical engineering, and aeronautical engineering.

Easier majors, which typically required less prep time, included fields like criminal justice, communication, and public relations.

6. What Does Your Academic Advisor Say?
Checking in with your academic advisor is an important step to take when deciding on a major.

Your advisor has likely had similar conversations with hundreds of students and can provide insight into picking a major. They may even propose a major you hadn't previously considered that meets your academic and career goals.

When speaking with an academic advisor, remember that their time is valuable and limited. Come to the meeting with a list of thoughtful questions to ask.

Have More Questions Before Heading Back to School?
Dive into our collection of back-to-school resources to find tips, checklists, and insights from real students.

Read Moreright arrow

Should You Double Major in College?
Undergraduates aren't necessarily limited to one field of study. Most colleges and universities allow you to double major or even triple major. Normally, students who double major choose two academic fields that complement each other, though you're not required to do this.

For example, if you wanted to pursue a career in international business, you might double major in business management and a foreign language. Other popular major combinations include:

Accounting and finance
Engineering and math
Political science and philosophy
Criminal justice and psychology
If you don't have enough room in your class schedule to pursue two majors, you can declare a minor in a secondary subject that interests you.

What If You Want to Design Your Own Major?
Recognizing that many learners have specific interests and career aspirations, many colleges now allow you to design your own interdisciplinary major. If you're considering this path, be sure to carefully review existing majors to ensure no existing option meets your needs.

Next, consider whether your proposed individual major meets current and future career requirements.

Lastly, speak with your advisor to get their input on important classes to include in your curriculum. You can also speak to other students who created their own majors to learn about the pros and cons of this decision.

Some examples of student-created majors include music and technology, public education history, and psychology of marketing.

Frequently Asked Questions About Choosing a Major
When do you have to declare a major?
When you have to depend a major depends on the college. In general, most schools require you to declare a major by the end of your sophomore year. Some students may start college with a declared major or undecided. Individual departments may also set their own rules, so it's critical you ask ahead of time about deadlines for choosing a major.

Even if you pick a major, you can always change it later on. Just note that the later you change your major, the more time you may need to spend in college in order to meet your new major's credit requirements.

What should you do if you can't decide on a major?
If you can't decide on a major, you have several options. For example, you might decide to take a few classes from different disciplines to help narrow your choices and see which subjects appeal to you the most and which you perform best in.

You can also meet with your academic advisor to review the pros and cons of the various majors you're considering. They can offer advice for figuring out which major(s) may work well for you based on factors like your level of interest, your class grades, and your career goals.

Can you change your major?
Yes, you can always change your major. In fact, a 2020 BestColleges study found that 3 in 5 graduates wished they could go back and change their majors. To change your major, you must meet with your academic advisor and go over your plans.

Note that if you complete a lot of classes related to one major and then later decide to switch to another, you may need to stay in school longer than the typical four years in order to meet your new major's credit requirements. This can add significant costs to your degree.

Does it look bad to colleges if you apply with an undecided major?
No. Generally speaking, colleges want students to think carefully about their decisions and not rush into any major if they're unsure. Admissions committees understand that choosing a major is a big decision, especially for applicants who are still in high school.

That said, some universities may require you to apply for a particular major so you can gain admission to the relevant school or department. This is usually the case with more professional majors like nursing and business.

Explore More College Resources
View all
Card Thumbnail - The 10 Most Popular College Majors
The 10 Most Popular College Majors
portrait of Staff Writers
by Staff Writers
October 8, 2021
Card Thumbnail - Choosing a College Major: Advice From Recent Grads
Choosing a College Major: Advice From Recent Grads
portrait of Staff Writers
by Staff Writers
August 19, 2021
Card Thumbnail - College Majors vs. Minors: What’s the Difference?
College Majors vs. Minors: What’s the Difference?
portrait of Staff Writers
by Staff Writers
August 17, 2020
Advertisement
Compare Your School Options
View the most relevant schools for your interests and compare them by tuition, programs, acceptance rate, and other factors important to finding your college home.

I want my
Select a degree
In
Select a category
Focusing on
Select a subject
Search Programs
Footer
About Us
Media and Press
Advertising Disclosure
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information
Our Contributors
Press Releases
Advertise With Us
Cookie Settings
Rankings Methodology
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Sitemap
Partner with Us
Terms of Service
Editorial Policy
© 2023 BestColleges.com, a Red Ventures Company

Skip to main content
Welcome to the United Nations
العربية中文EnglishFrançaisРусскийEspañol
UN logoClimate Action
Search the United Nations
Search
A-Z Site Index
Home
Raising Ambition »
The Science »
Actors, Actions, Solutions »
Act Now
UN and Climate Change »
Press Materials
Digital Library »
How is climate change impacting the world’s ocean
The ocean has long taken the brunt of the impacts of human-made global warming, says UN Climate Change. As the planet’s greatest carbon sink, the ocean absorbs excess heat and energy released from rising greenhouse gas emissions trapped in the Earth’s system. Today, the ocean has absorbed about 90 percent of the heat generated by rising emissions. 

As the excessive heat and energy warms the ocean, the change in temperature leads to unparalleled cascading effects, including ice-melting, sea-level rise, marine heatwaves, and ocean acidification. 

These changes ultimately cause a lasting impact on marine biodiversity, and the lives and livelihoods of coastal communities and beyond - including around 680 million people living in low-lying coastal areas, almost 2 billion who live in half of the world’s megacities that are coastal, nearly half of the world’s population (3.3 billion) that depends on fish for protein, and almost 60 million people who work in fisheries and the aquaculture sector worldwide. 

Here are some of the major consequences of the impacts of climate change on the ocean.

photocomposition: a turtle swimming in the ocean
 

Sea-level rise
Sea-level rise has accelerated in recent decades due to increasing ice loss in the world’s polar regions. Latest data from the World Meteorological Organization shows that global mean sea-level reached a new record high in 2021, rising an average of 4.5 millimeter per year over the period 2013 to 2021. 

Together with intensifying tropical cyclones, sea-level rise has exacerbated extreme events such as deadly storm surges and coastal hazards such as flooding, erosion and landslides, which are now projected to occur at least once a year in many locations. Such events occurred once per century historically.

Moreover, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) says that several regions, such as the western Tropical Pacific, the South-west Pacific, the North Pacific, the South-west Indian Ocean and the South Atlantic, face substantially faster sea-level rise.
 

photocomposition: a turtle swimming in the ocean

Marine heatwaves
Marine heatwaves have doubled in frequency, and have become longer-lasting, more intense and extensive. The IPCC says that human influence has been the main driver of the ocean heat increase observed since the 1970s. 

The majority of heatwaves took place between 2006 and 2015, causing widespread coral bleaching and reef degradation. In 2021, nearly 60 percent of the world’s ocean surface experienced at least one spell of marine heatwaves. The UN Environment Programme says that every one of the world’s coral reefs could bleach by the end of the century if the water continues to warm. 

Coral bleaching occurs as reefs lose their life-sustaining microscopic algae when under stress. The last global bleaching event started in 2014 and extended well into 2017 - spreading across the Pacific, Indian and Atlantic oceans. 
 

Loss of marine biodiversity
Rising temperatures increase the risk of irreversible loss of marine and coastal ecosystems. Today, widespread changes have been observed, including damage to coral reefs and mangroves that support ocean life, and migration of species to higher latitudes and altitudes where the water could be cooler. 

Latest estimates from the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization warn that more than half of the world’s marine species may stand on the brink of extinction by 2100. At a 1.1°C  increase in temperature today, an estimated 60 percent of the world's marine ecosystems have already been degraded or are being used unsustainably. A warming of 1.5°C threatens to destroy 70 to 90 percent of coral reefs, and a 2°C increase means a nearly 100 percent loss - a point of no return.

photocomposition: a turtle swimming in the oceanphotocomposition: a turtle swimming in the oceanphotocomposition: a turtle swimming in the ocean
Read more

The ocean – the world’s greatest ally against climate change
The ocean is central to reducing global greenhouse gas emissions. Here are a few reasons we need to safeguard the ocean as our best ally for climate solutions.


Peter Thomson: Moving the needle on the sustainable blue economy
Ambassador Peter Thomson of Fiji, UN Special Envoy for the Ocean, mobilizes global action to conserve and sustainably use the ocean. Read the full interview.


Climate Adaptation
Climate change is here. There are many ways to adapt to what is happening and what will happen. For more tips, check out the ActNow campaign.

ShareFacebookTwitterEmailWhatsApp
United Nations
youtubeflickrfacebooktwitterinstagram
A-Z SITE INDEX
CONTACT
COPYRIGHT
FAQ
FRAUD ALERT
PRIVACY NOTICE
TERMS OF USE


Verywell Mind
Mental Health A-Z
Self-Improvement
Psychology
Podcast
News
About UsSearch
Search
Verywell Health
Verywell Fit
Verywell Family

THEORIES  PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY
What Is Procrastination?
Putting off tasks we don't enjoy is common, despite the consequences

By Kendra Cherry Updated on November 14, 2022
 Medically reviewed by David Susman, PhD
Print 
Looking at a stopwatch
Sara Cuadrado / Getty Images
Table of Contents
Causes
Why Do You Procrastinate?
Types of Procrastination
The Negative Impact
Strategies to Stop
Procrastination is the act of delaying or putting off tasks until the last minute, or past their deadline. Some researchers define procrastination as a "form of self-regulation failure characterized by the irrational delay of tasks despite potentially negative consequences."1
According to Joseph Ferrari, a professor of psychology at DePaul University in Chicago and author of "Still Procrastinating: The No Regret Guide to Getting It Done," around 20% of U.S. adults are chronic procrastinators.2

No matter how well-organized and committed you are, chances are that you have found yourself frittering away hours on trivial pursuits (watching TV, updating your Facebook status, shopping online) when you should have been spending that time on work or school-related projects.

Whether you're putting off finishing a project for work, avoiding homework assignments, or ignoring household chores, procrastination can have a major impact on your job, your grades, and your life.

In most cases, procrastination is not a sign of a serious problem. It's a common tendency that most people give in to at some point or another.

 Friday Fix: How to Stop Procrastinating
Causes
Remember that time that you thought you had a week left to finish a project that was really due the next day? How about the time you decided not to clean up your apartment because you "didn't feel like doing it right now?"

We often assume that projects won't take as long to finish as they really will, which can lead to a false sense of security when we believe that we still have plenty of time to complete these tasks.3

One of the biggest factors contributing to procrastination is the notion that we have to feel inspired or motivated to work on a task at a particular moment.

The reality is that if you wait until you're in the right frame of mind to do certain tasks (especially undesirable ones), you will probably find that the right time simply never comes along and the task never gets completed.

The following are a few other factors that cause procrastination.

Academics
Researchers suggest that procrastination can be particularly pronounced among students. A 2007 meta analysis published in the Psychological Bulletin found that a whopping 80% to 95% of college students procrastinated on a regular basis, particularly when it came to completing assignments and coursework.4﻿

According to researchers, there are some major cognitive distortions that lead to academic procrastination.5﻿ Students tend to:

Overestimate how much time they have left to perform tasks
Overestimate how motivated they will be in the future
Underestimate how long certain activities will take to complete
Mistakenly assume that they need to be in the right frame of mind to work on a project
Present Bias
The present bias is a phenomenon observed in human behavior that may result in procrastination. The present bias means that we tend to be motivated more by immediate gratification or rewards than we are by long-term rewards. This is why it feels good in the moment to procrastinate.3

For example, the immediate reward of staying in bed and watching TV is more appealing than the long-term reward of publishing a blog post, which would take much longer to accomplish.

 What Is Cognitive Bias?
Depression
Procrastination can also be a result of depression. Feelings of hopelessness, helplessness, and a lack of energy can make it difficult to start (and finish) the simplest task.6 Depression can also lead to self-doubt. When you can't figure out how to tackle a project or feel insecure about your abilities, you might find it easier to put it off.

 4 Daily Habits People With Depression May Avoid
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD)
Procrastination is also pretty common in people with obsessive-compulsive disorder. One reason is that OCD is often linked with maladaptive perfectionism, which causes fears about making new mistakes, doubts about whether you are doing something correctly, and worry over others' expectations of you.7

People with OCD also often have a propensity toward indecision, causing them to procrastinate rather than make a decision.

 Embrace Indecisiveness to Promote Change
ADHD
Many adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) struggle with procrastination.8 When you're so distracted by outside stimuli, as well as internal thoughts, it can be hard to get started on a task, especially if that task is difficult or not interesting to you.

Is Procrastination a Mental Illness?
Procrastination itself is not a mental illness. But in some cases, it may be symptomatic of an underlying mental health condition such as depression, OCD, or ADHD.

 The Relationship Between ADHD and Procrastination
Why Do You Procrastinate?
We often come up with a number of excuses or rationalizations to justify our behavior. According to researchers, there are 15 key reasons why people say they procrastinate:9

Not knowing what needs to be done
Not knowing how to do something
Not wanting to do something
Not caring if it gets done or not
Not caring when something gets done
Not feeling in the mood to do it
Being in the habit of waiting until the last minute
Believing that you work better under pressure
Thinking that you can finish it at the last minute
Lacking the initiative to get started
Forgetting
Blaming sickness or poor health
Waiting for the right moment
Needing time to think about the task
Delaying one task in favor of working on another
Press Play for Advice On Completing Tasks
Hosted by Editor-in-Chief and therapist Amy Morin, LCSW, this episode of The Verywell Mind Podcast shares how to get tasks done with a science-backed trick known as 'temptation bundling.' Click below to listen now.


Follow Now: Apple Podcasts / Spotify / Google Podcasts

Types of Procrastination
Some researchers classify two types of procrastinators: passive and active procrastinators.10

Passive procrastinators: Delay the task because they have trouble making decisions and acting on them
Active procrastinators: Delay the task purposefully because working under pressure allows them to "feel challenged and motivated"
Others define the types of procrastinators based on different behavioral styles of procrastination, including:11

Perfectionist: Puts off tasks out of the fear of not being able to complete a task perfectly
Dreamer: Puts off tasks because they are not good at paying attention to detail
Defier: Doesn't believe someone should dictate their time schedule
Worrier: Puts off tasks out of fear of change or leaving the comfort of "the known"
Crisis-maker: Puts off tasks because they like working under pressure
Overdoer: Takes on too much and struggles with finding time to start and complete task
 What Does It Mean to Feel Overwhelmed?
Procrastinators vs. Non-Procrastinators
"Non-procrastinators focus on the task that needs to be done. They have a stronger personal identity and are less concerned about what psychologists call 'social esteem'—how others like us—as opposed to self-esteem which is how we feel about ourselves," explained Dr. Ferrari in an interview with the American Psychological Association (APA).2﻿

According to psychologist Piers Steel, people who don't procrastinate tend to be high in the personality trait known as conscientiousness, one of the broad dispositions identified by the Big Five theory of personality. People who are high in conscientiousness also tend to be high in other areas including self-discipline, persistence, and personal responsibility.

The Negative Impact of Procrastination
It is only in cases where procrastination becomes chronic and begins to have a serious impact on a person's daily life that it becomes a more serious issue. In such instances, it's not just a matter of having poor time management skills, it's a major part of their lifestyle.

Perhaps they pay their bills late, don't start work on big projects until the night before the deadline, delay gift shopping until the day before a birthday, and even file their income tax returns late.

Unfortunately, this procrastination can have a serious impact on a number of life areas, including a person's mental health and social, professional, and financial well-being:12

Higher levels of stress and illness
Increased burden placed on social relationships
Resentment from friends, family, co-workers, and fellow students
Consequences of delinquent bills and income tax returns
 Friday Fix: How to Stop Procrastinating
How to Overcome Procrastination
You might find yourself wondering, How can I stop procrastinating?

Fortunately, there are a number of different things you can do to fight procrastination and start getting things done on time. Consider these your procrastination exercises:13

Make a to-do list: To help keep you on track, consider placing a due date next to each item.
Take baby steps: Break down the items on your list into small, manageable steps so that your tasks don’t seem so overwhelming.
Recognize the warning signs: Pay attention to any thoughts of procrastination and do your best to resist the urge. If you begin to think about procrastinating, force yourself to spend a few minutes working on your task.
Eliminate distraction: Ask yourself what pulls your attention away the most—whether it's Instagram, Facebook updates, or the local news—and turn off those sources of distraction.
Pat yourself on the back: When you finish an item on your to-do list on time, congratulate yourself and reward yourself by indulging in something you find fun.    
 How to Overcome Procrastination for Improved Mental Health
13 Sources

By Kendra Cherry
Kendra Cherry, MS, is an author and educational consultant focused on helping students learn about psychology.

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback
Related Articles
Business woman sitting at her desk
The Relationship Between ADHD and Procrastination
Student using laptop in a university library
How to Prevent Anxiety From Causing Procrastination
Woman sitting on brain illustration with papers and objects circling her
How Embracing the Chaos Helps My ADHD
Women looking through window contemplating and thinking at home
ADHD Paralysis: How to Overcome It
Young boy asleep on textbook
How to Overcome Procrastination for Improved Mental Health
Relaxed type b personality
Are You a Type B Personality?
Woman procrastinating
12 Ways to Deal With Chronic Procrastination
Portrait of blond student on bed working on laptop
What Is Parkinson's Law?
pomodoro technique
What Is the Pomodoro Technique?
Businessman with paperwork leading meeting in office
What Is Autocratic Leadership?
Chef in commercial kitchen seasoning food
ADHD Symptom Spotlight: Perfectionism
Addicted young beautiful woman chatting and surfing on the internet using her smart phone sleepy bored and tired late at night in mobile addiction concept and insomnia
What Is Revenge Bedtime Procrastination?
Woman working on her laptop in her bedroom at night 
ADHD Symptom Spotlight: Time Blindness
Man multitasking at his desk while working late
How Multitasking Affects Productivity and Brain Health
Man With Doctor
How Is ADHD Treated for Children and Adults?
Girl stressed thinking of tasks in front of her computer
The Lost Skill of Resting With ADHD
Verywell Mind
Daily Tips for a Healthy Mind to Your Inbox
Enter your email
SIGN UP
Mental Health A-Z
Self-Improvement
Psychology
News
Voices
The Verywell Mind Podcast
Meet Our Review Board
About Us
Editorial Process
Diversity Pledge
Privacy Policy
In the News
Advertise
Terms of Use
Careers
Contact
Crisis Support
Follow Us
instagram
tiktok
facebook
flipboard
Verywell Health
Verywell Fit
Verywell Family
Verywell Mind's content is for informational and educational purposes only. Our website is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment.
Ⓒ 2023 Dotdash Media, Inc. — All rights reserved
Verywell Mind is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.

Skip to main content
U.S. flagAn official website of the United States government Here's how you know 
NIH NLM LogoLog in
Access keysNCBI HomepageMyNCBI HomepageMain ContentMain Navigation
Search PMC Full-Text Archive
Search PMC Full-Text Archive
Search in PMC
Run this search in PubMed 
Advanced Search  User Guide
Journal List  Wiley-Blackwell Online Open  PMC5573992
Logo of blackwellopen
Journal of Applied Philosophy
J Appl Philos. 2017 Aug; 34(4): 498–513.
Published online 2016 Nov 9. doi: 10.1111/japp.12249
PMCID: PMC5573992
PMID: 28919655
The Ethics of Germline Gene Editing
Christopher Gyngell, Marie Sklodowska‐Curie Fellow, 1 Thomas Douglas, Senior Research Fellow, 2 and Julian Savulescu, Professor, Director 3
Author information Copyright and License information Disclaimer
See "Germline Genetic Modification and Identity: the Mitochondrial and Nuclear Genomes" in Oxf J Leg Stud, volume 37 on page 886.
Go to:
Abstract
Germline Gene Editing (GGE) has enormous potential both as a research tool and a therapeutic intervention. While other types of gene editing are relatively uncontroversial, GGE has been strongly resisted. In this article, we analyse the ethical arguments for and against pursuing GGE by allowing and funding its development. We argue there is a strong case for pursuing GGE for the prevention of disease. We then examine objections that have been raised against pursuing GGE and argue that these fail. We conclude that the moral case in favour of pursuing GGE is stronger than the case against. This suggests that pursuing GGE is morally permissible and indeed morally desirable.

Go to:
1. Introduction
In April 2015, it was announced that gene editing techniques had been used to modify the DNA sequences of human embryos for the first time.1 The study by Liang and co‐authors attempted to use the gene editing technique CRISPR to reverse the genetic mutations that lead to the disease muscular dystrophy. The study marked the first time the human germline – the DNA individuals pass to their children and subsequent descendants – had been intentionally modified.2

The rise of gene editing technologies has been rapid. While crude genetic engineering technologies have been available for over two decades, early techniques did not have serious potential as clinically useful modifiers of human DNA. They relied on viruses to deliver novel genetic material to the cell. This often only changed one of the two copies of the target gene, meaning animals had to be bred together to make modifications effective. This method also made unintended changes to large segments of the genome, and only a small proportion of the modified animals did not suffer serious side effects.3

The development of techniques that use engineered enzymes, rather than viruses, to alter DNA has revolutionised genetic engineering. These techniques were given the collective moniker ‘gene editing’ to reflect their increased efficiency and precision over older methods. Gene editing techniques have been used to make precise changes to the genes of yeast, fish, plants, rodents, pigs, and primates. In a recent study, gene editing was used to inactivate 62 genes of a retrovirus in a pig cell line, a significant step towards generating pig organs suitable for xenotransplantation.4 In October 2015, researchers created a beagle with double the normal muscle mass by editing a gene involved in muscle growth.5

Despite these far‐reaching applications, public debate has focused on the ethics of human germline gene editing (GGE).6 Some scientists and public interest groups, including the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) have called for an international ban on any gene editing research in human embryos. The US‐based National Institutes of Health maintained that performing such research would cross ‘a line that should not be crossed’. Other scientists have taken a more moderate view. In 2015, an international summit co‐hosted by the US National Academy of Sciences and US National Academy of Medicine, the UK Royal Society, and the Chinese Academy of Sciences rejected calls for a ban on GGE in research. Instead they argued for a temporary ban on the clinical use of GGE that should be regularly revisited ‘as scientific knowledge advances and societal views evolve.’7 Similarly, the Hinxton Group, an international consortium of scientists, ethicists and policy experts called for the continuation of GGE in basic research and a pause on any reproductive applications.8

In this article, we examine the ethics of pursuing GGE, where ‘pursuing’ GGE would entail at least (i) allowing scientists significant freedom to conduct GGE research, and (ii) the investment of significant public resources in such research. We begin, in Section 2, by outlining the case for pursuing GGE, both for the direct prevention of disease, and as a research tool. In Section 3, we analyse some of the ethical objections that have been raised against pursuing GGE. We argue that all of these objections fail. We conclude that the moral case in favour of pursuing GGE is stronger than the case against and that pursuing GGE is thus morally permissible and morally desirable.

Go to:
2. The Case for Pursuing GGE
2.1. The Medical Case
If proven acceptably safe, the most obvious clinical application of GGE will be to prevent genetic disease. Roughly 6% of all babies born have a serious birth defect of genetic or partly genetic origin.9 If we can identify the genes responsible for these conditions, it will in principle be possible to prevent these conditions through GGE.

Many believe that GGE is unnecessary for this goal. Couples wishing to avoid genetic disease in their children can use in‐vitro fertilisation (IVF) to create multiple embryos, all of which can be tested for genetic disease before implantation. IVF and pre‐implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) are already widely used to avoid passing on over 250 genetic diseases including cystic fibrosis, Huntington's disease, haemophilia and phenylketonuria.

Marcy Darnovsky, the executive director of the non‐profit organisation, The Center for Genetics and Society, has claimed that ‘there is no persuasive medical reason to manipulate the human germline because inherited genetic diseases can be prevented using embryo screening techniques, among other means’.10 This view was also expressed in a Nature commentary calling for a moratorium on GGE; the authors stated that we ‘cannot imagine a situation in which its use in human embryos would offer a therapeutic benefit over existing and developing methods.’11

However, there is in fact a significant medical case for pursuing GGE, which we will now outline. In doing so, and throughout, we assume that current people have moral reasons to prevent the occurrence of disease in future people. Moreover, we assume that these reasons apply regardless of whether our current actions to prevent disease make any future people better off than they would otherwise have been.

This assumption is consistent with standard views regarding, for example, the desirability of eradicating infectious diseases, such as malaria and smallpox, and of adopting policies that reduce smoking and alcohol use during pregnancy. Most would agree that there are reasons to adopt such measures and policies, even if they will not affect anyone who currently exists. These reasons are best understood as reasons to prevent the occurrence of disease in future people. Moreover, most would accept that there are reasons to adopt such measures and policies even if doing so will affect no currently existing person and affect which future people exist, so that they make no future person better off than they would otherwise have been.

2.1.1. Single Gene Disorders For some couples, using GGE may be the only way to avoid passing on single gene disorders. Approximately 19% of women undergoing IVF only produce one viable embryo.12 Imagine that two carriers of the gene for cystic fibrosis (CF) wish to have a child together. They have a one in four chance of having a child with CF. They use IVF because they want to avoid this outcome. However, they only produce one embryo and this has two copies of the CF gene and will thus develop CF. In cases such as this, selection is not an option; however, GGE could be used to prevent CF.
Even when couples produce more than one embryo, in some cases selection will not avoid disease. In late onset dominant conditions, like Huntington's disease, some patients carry two copies of the disease‐causing gene. This means that every embryo produced from their gametes will be predisposed to disease. GGE will be the only way such individuals could have children that are biologically related to them and who are not predisposed to disease.

Therefore, a straightforward medical application of GGE is to allow single gene disorders to be avoided in cases where selection is not possible.

Some might object that such cases are very rare. Yet even if GGE would only enable a small number of additional people to avoid passing genetic diseases onto their children, this still generates a reason to pursue it; recall, we are assuming that we have reasons to prevent disease in future people.

Moreover, even in cases where IVF and PGD can be used to avoid genetic disease in a couple's offspring, GGE may have the advantage of preventing disease in subsequent generations as well. In the case of autosomal recessive disorders, children who are born as the result of PGD are often carriers of the condition their parents selected against. These individuals have a greater‐than‐normal risk of themselves having children with the disease.

Imagine a couple who both carry the gene for muscular dystrophy (MD), and wish to avoid passing the disease on to their children. If these parents use GGE, all disease‐causing genes can be removed from an embryo. In the absence of spontaneous mutations, this will make it impossible for their children, and their grandchildren, to develop MD. Even though genetic selection could in theory be used to select a non‐carrier, this could require creation of a large number of embryos, which may not be possible. If they use PGD, their child may still be a carrier of the MD gene, and their grandchildren will still be at risk of developing MD. This couple might reasonably prefer GGE to PGD, and it is plausible that we have reasons to enable the fulfilment of such reasonable preferences, for example, by pursuing GGE.

Moreover, even leaving aside prospective parents’ preferences, cases such as this suggest that there is reason to pursue GGE. Using GGE to remove all disease‐causing genes from an embryo will lower the total frequency of disease‐causing genes in the gene pool, and therefore the incidence of such diseases in future generations. And this, on the assumption we introduced above, is an outcome that we have reason to bring about.

Finally, genetic selection replaces one individual with a disease with a healthy individual. It does not benefit those with disease. Its benefits are impersonal. GGE on the other hand could provide benefits to individuals who would otherwise be born with genetic disorders – it could cure their disorders.13 In cases where the embryo will in any case be brought to term, and in the absence of GGE would be afflicted by disease, its benefits are arguably person‐affecting. It is plausible that person‐affecting benefits are more important than impersonal benefits.14

These considerations show that, were GGE developed to the point that it could be used to avoid single gene disorders, there would be strong reasons to use it in some cases. GGE would be a more widely applicable intervention than PGD, as it would allow people to avoid genetic diseases in cases where selection is not possible. It would also be a more effective intervention insofar as it would allow families to remove all disease‐causing genes from their lineages, minimising the risk of disease in their decedents and future generations. And it has the potential to produce person‐affecting benefits.

2.1.2. Other Disorders Most common diseases are not the result of single gene mutations. They are the result of a polygenic disposition together with environmental influences. For example, genome wide association studies have identified at least 44 genes involved in diabetes;15 35 genes involved in coronary artery disease;16 and over 300 genes involved in common cancers.17
Traditional selection methods, like IVF and PGD, are not powerful enough to select against polygenic diseases.18 Say 20 genes contribute to a particular trait. If a couple wish to use PGD to select for 20 different genes in an embryo, they would need to create around 10,000 embryos to make it sufficiently likely that one will have the right combination at all 20 loci. During routine IVF, couples rarely produce more than 10 embryos. This would give them less than a 1% chance of being able to select an embryo with the desired genotype.

GGE allows multiple changes to be made to a single embryo, and could therefore target many different genes simultaneously. It has already been used to make more than 60 simultaneous changes in animal embryos, and this number can be expected to increase. This ability could make GGE a powerful disease‐preventing technology. Three out of every ten deaths in those under 70 are caused by chronic diseases, like cancer, diabetes and heart disease. GGE could be a powerful tool in the fight against these diseases and could ensure that those treated with gene editing have the best chance to live healthily into old age.

We currently do not understand the genetics underlying common polygenic diseases well enough to consider using GGE to reduce their incidence. But it is clear such applications are a long‐term possibility.

Some might object that as polygenic disorders have environmental causes as well as genetic ones, GGE is unnecessary to prevent them. Even if we determine the genetic changes needed to prevent or reduce the risk of these disorders, we could more easily use environmental interventions. But it does not follow from the fact that a disease is partly or even primarily caused by environmental factors that environmental interventions are effective in preventing it, let alone the most effective means of prevention. The environmental causes might be more difficult to identify or alter than the genetic causes, and even when we can identify the environmental causes, polygenic disorders may be optimally prevented by biological interventions. For example, using GGE techniques to make the immune system more efficient at destroying cancer cells might be the best way to reduce the incidence of cancer, even if cancer is predominantly caused by environmental factors. Indeed, the fact that polygenic disorders currently result in so many premature deaths, despite the fact we have identified many of their environmental risk factors, indicates we need to explore novel approaches to their treatment.

In addition, in most cases we should not think of environmental and genetic prevention techniques as mutually exclusive alternatives. Even where environmental interventions could be somewhat effective in preventing a disease, they are unlikely to reduce the risk of disease to zero, suggesting that there will still be a case for deploying genetic interventions alongside environmental ones.

Another speculative long‐term medical benefit of GGE is spreading resistance to infectious diseases.19 Some people have genes that make them resistant to particular pathogens. In cases of infectious disease outbreaks, GGE could ensure that everyone born in a region is resistant to local pathogens. Imagine an Ebola outbreak that surpasses traditional means of containment. As genetic background determines susceptibility to Ebola,20 genes that make individuals highly resistant to Ebola may soon be identified. In such a case, GGE could be used to spread resistance genes in a population, effectively immunising the next generation.

Such actions will be highly impractical if GGE could only be performed through IVF. But in the future it may be possible to perform ‘in vivo’ germline gene edits. In vivo gene edits of muscle stem cells have been performed in mice,21 indicating that in vivo edits of spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) in humans may be feasible in the future. Using gene editing on SSC's in the testes could modify all the sperm that a male produces, thus ensuring they pass on particular changes to all of their descendants. This could allow resistance genes to spread quickly through populations without the need for IVF.

All of the benefits discussed in this section (2.1.2) are highly speculative. However, given the large disease burden caused by infectious and polygenetic diseases, the potential benefits are highly significant. They add further weight to the medical case of pursuing GGE.

2.2. The Research Case
Even if the medical case in favour of pursuing GGE fails, it would not follow that all GGE should be banned, or that it should be deprived of significant public resources. GGE has an important role in basic research which should be distinguished from its potential applications in disease prevention.

Many jurisdictions permit and fund embryo research that seeks to further our understanding of early development, and GGE could have a unique and beneficial role to play in this research. Using gene editing techniques, researchers can investigate the role of genetics in human development. Indeed, this was the motivation of the researchers who lodged the first application to perform GGE in the United Kingdom.

We currently do not understand many aspects of human development. For instance, the process by which embryonic cells differentiate into specialised cell types remains largely a mystery. Recent evidence suggests that our current models, which are based on studies in mice, may be wrong.22 Using GGE to investigate the activity of particular genes in early human embryos would help unlock the secrets of early development. This could potentially lead to non‐GGE‐based clinical advances in the future – such as improving IVF success rates and reducing the incidence of miscarriage.23

GGE could also improve our understanding of genetic diseases. Embryonic stem cells altered to carry disease‐causing mutations can be used as models of genetic disease and substrates for in vitro drug testing. For example, embryonic stem cell lines could be created that carry the mutations associated with Parkinson's disease, and then induced to grow into nerve cells (which malfunction in Parkinson's disease). Potential drugs for Parkinson's disease could then be tested on these nerve cells. This could expedite the development of pharmacological treatments.

While such research currently takes place using induced pluripotent stem (IPS) cells, embryonic cells may have technical advantages.24 IPS cells are created from somatic cells, which may have undergone so‐called epigenetic changes. As a result, IPS cell lines are more diverse and behave less predictably than embryonic cell lines. Drug screening conducted on gene‐edited embryonic cells may lead to more reliable results.

Similar techniques could be used to generate stem cell therapies. Embryonic stem cells could be modified to carry alterations that provide protection against some disease. These cells could then be grown into various cell types for direct therapies. For example, gene‐edited embryonic cells could be used to create immune cells that target cancer. These modified cells could then be used as part of cancer treatments. Although using IPS cells in this way will be effective in some cases,25 embryonic cells contain fewer epigenetic changes and they could potentially have some unique applications.

The fact that the use of GGE in research could produce substantial benefits generates further pro tanto reasons in favour of allowing and funding some forms of germline gene editing. GGE could help us unlock the secrets of human development and the genesis of disease. Such knowledge may be valuable in its own right, in addition to leading to non‐GGE‐based treatments in the future.

In sum, there are significant reasons in favour of pursuing GGE. In the short term, GGE may be a valuable research tool and provide a novel treatment for single gene disorders. In the longer term, GGE could be an important tool in the fight against polygenic and infectious disease.

Go to:
3. Objections to Pursuing GGE
In the above section, we argued that there is a significant case in favour of pursuing some types of GGE. In this section we analyse some of the arguments that have been offered against the pursuit of GGE to determine whether they undermine this case.

3.1. Safety
Many believe GGE research ought not to be permitted or funded because it is unsafe.

The National Institutes of Health (NIH) point to ‘serious and unquantifiable safety issues’ in justifying their negative stance toward GGE research.26 Concerns for safety were also prominent in commentaries which appeared in Nature and Science calling for GGE to be halted or strongly discouraged.27

The most obvious safety concerns regarding GGE stem from what are called ‘off‐target’ mutations – unintended changes to the genome. Off‐target mutations could potentially result in the development of cancer and other pathologies. Gene editing performed on human embryos that would subsequently be brought to term therefore risks causing disease and disability.

Are the safety risks associated with off‐target mutations strong enough to justify prohibiting or declining to fund all forms of GGE research? This is a familiar question. Nearly all medical research poses safety risks to participants. Safety risks are therefore routinely considered as part of research ethics frameworks.28 The first step in assessing safety risks is identifying who is at risk of harm. Thus, when assessing the risks of gene editing in human embryos, we should begin by asking who may be harmed by this research.

Some will say that the embryo itself is at risk of harm. But it is doubtful that the embryo is the type of entity that can be harmed, or at least, harmed in a morally significant way. The embryo does not have experiences or desires, and on some accounts of wellbeing, entities that lack experiences and desires have no wellbeing and thus cannot be harmed. Moreover, even if embryos can be harmed, it is doubtful whether harms to embryos have enough moral significance to justify prohibition or non‐funding of otherwise valuable research. Indeed, many jurisdictions currently permit and fund embryo research that involves certain destruction of the embryo, and this is widely thought to be permissible. Similarly, many jurisdictions permit and fund abortion, and the discarding of unwanted IVF embryos. It is doubtful that one could hold these practices to be permissible – as many do – while holding that the death of even an early embryo counts as a morally weighty harm.

Finally, even if the death of an embryo does count as a morally weighty harm, this may not count decisively against pursuing GGE in all circumstances. This is because, if GGE is developed to the point that it becomes safe for therapeutic uses, it could be used as a replacement for PGD which itself often results in the destruction of excess embryos. Thus, development of GGE could potentially reduce the number of human embryo deaths that will occur in the future.29

It is harms to future people, not embryos that are the most plausible basis for objections to GGE. If the embryos used in this research are brought to term, the children who are born as a result of these technologies could develop cancer or other diseases as a result of off‐target mutations.

There is, however, an easy way to protect future people from these safety risks: ensure none come into existence. As long as GGE results in off target mutations, we can ensure that these safety risks are avoided by making sure that none of the embryos used in the research are allowed to develop to the point that they are the subjects of morally weighty harms.

The study by Liang and co‐authors shows how the safety risks of GGE can be negated. The study was not conducted on embryos that were destined to be born, or indeed even had the potential to be born. The researchers used triploid embryos – embryos that have an extra set of chromosomes. These embryos cannot survive pregnancy, and are normally spontaneously aborted. Trialling the CRISPR system in these embryos had no chance of resulting in a live birth. Although the study did find a high rate of off‐target mutations, these did not result in morally significant harm.

Regulations that govern embryo research in several countries that allow such research are already sufficient to protect future people from the safety risks of GGE research. The UK, for instance, has laws allowing limited forms of genetic research to be conducted, provided that the embryo is destroyed by 14 days and not implanted into a woman.30 Given this legal requirement, and assuming compliance with the law, no GGE research conducted in the UK risks harming any future child.

Some might worry that pursuing GGE research under such a regulatory system will create pressure to relax laws in the future, and will thus lead indirectly to objectionably harmful research. If the rate of off‐target mutations significantly improves, legislators may lift the 14‐day limit and allow edited embryos to be brought to term. If this happens, it is important that any initial clinical trials using GGE are conducted with a focus on harm minimisation.

Early gene therapy trials were conducted with an emphasis on participant consent. The most infamous case is that of Jesse Gelsinger. In that case a somatic cell gene therapy was developed for ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, a disorder of nitrogen metabolism. The condition comes in two forms: mild, with normal life expectancy and management by diet, and severe, which is lethal in the first year. Researchers, acting on the advice of ethicists, decided to conduct the first trials in adults with the mild form of the disease as they were capable of consenting. Gelsinger consented at age 18 and died due to a catastrophic immune reaction. He would have had a normal life expectancy in the absence of the intervention.31

The trial should have been conducted in infants with the severe form of the disease, as this would have resulted in less expected harm.32 The same principle applies to any trial of GGE – the first trials ought to be conducted in diseases which are lethal soon after birth. The reason for this is if the GGE technique turns out to be lethal, little is lost because that individual had no hope of long‐term survival in any case. While it is not possible to obtain consent from infant participants (though their parents must consent), it is necessary to weigh the value of consent against minimising expected harm.33

Indeed, other safety measures could be used to minimise safety risks for edited embryos resulting in live births. Testing of embryos and foetuses could be performed to evaluate the effectiveness of GGE. For example, PGD could be performed, with whole genome analysis, at day 3–4, chorionic villus sampling (CVS) at 10 weeks, and structural ultrasound at 20 weeks. If evidence of off target mutations were found, termination of pregnancy could be performed.

Given the ready availability of safety measures, there seems little reason to suppose that pursuing some forms of GGE now will lead to so much unsafe use of the technology in the future that we should not pursue it now.

3.2. Germline Changes
A common objection that has been levelled against the pursuit of GGE is that altering the germline will have negative consequences for future generations.34 This objection can take two forms: either GGE will make unintended changes to the germline, through off‐target mutations, which will have negative effects on future generations; or the changes we intend to make to the germline will have harmful unforeseen consequences.

It is clear that off‐target mutations associated with GGE could be harmful to future generations. The accumulation of random mutations may slowly lead to increasing rates of disease. However, it is plausible that as GGE develops the rate of off‐target mutations will become negligible. The rates of off‐targets mutations in animal models have been declining rapidly, and such mutations are now considered ‘undetectable’ in some applications.35 In addition, there will be ways to estimate the risk from off‐target mutations, as discussed above. This will further reduce the risk to future generations.

Still, some may argue that even just a few germline changes could cause widespread harm to future generations. It is possible that these will be missed in any safety checks that are performed. However, it seems unlikely that a small number of germline mutations pose a serious enough risk to future generations that we ought not to pursue GGE. Mutations are constantly being introduced in the human germline and many human activities increase the rate at which they occur. For example, delaying paternity increases the number of mutations in sperm, which are then passed on to children in the next generation. Not many believe these additional mutations represent a morally weighty risk to future generations. If they did, this would arguably justify screening the sperm of older fathers for mutations, or providing incentives for young men to freeze sperm for use later in life.36 Similarly, some cancer treatments potentially cause germline mutations.37 However not many argue that these mutations cause a weighty enough risk to future generations that we ought to screen the gametes of cancer survivors for mutations before allowing or assisting them to reproduce.

Therefore, if GGE will be deployed only at the point where the number of off‐target mutations is very small, the risk of harm to future generations is unlikely to count decisively against pursuing it. This risk is likely outweighed by the potential benefits of GGE for future generations, discussed in Section 2.

A different concern about the effect of GGE on future generations centres on the intended, rather than the unintended, changes we will make to the germline. We may use GGE to increase the frequency of genes that are beneficial in one generation, yet these same genes may be harmful to future generations.

Some genes provide protection against certain diseases but increase susceptibility to others. For example, it is known that a variant of the DARC gene – which codes for an antigen found on red blood cells – provides protection against malaria. However this version of the gene also disposes people to be more susceptible to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Suppose that in a region where malaria is prevalent and HIV rare many parents use GGE to give their children forms of the gene that protect against malaria. Subsequent generations could then be decimated by HIV. Other immune genes have known benefits but may also have costs that are yet to be discovered. For example, the CCR5 gene codes for a type of receptor found on macrophages (a type of white blood cell), which are targeted by the HIV virus. One form of the CCR5 gene provides resistance to the HIV virus. However, given the important role played by macrophage receptors in fighting other infections, it is possible that individuals with this form of the gene will be more susceptible to other infectious agents that are yet to evolve. If we use GGE to introduce the HIV resistant version of the CCR5 gene, this may make future generations susceptible to a future plague.38

There is no doubt that such concerns need to be carefully considered before GGE is used in a clinical setting. Current decision‐makers need to consider the interests of future generations, and should not reduce valuable forms of diversity.39 But these concerns do not show that GGE will cause harms to future generations that outweigh its benefits. Rather they demonstrate the need to take care in deciding when and how to deploy the technology and to consider the likely future environment in which that individual will exist.

3.3. The Consent and Autonomy of Future Generations
Some arguments against GGE dispute the authority of current individuals to make decisions on behalf of future generations. In outlining their decisions to continue not to fund GGE research, the NIH pointed to the ‘ethical issues presented by altering the germline in a way that affects the next generation without their consent.’40 This argument is pursued less directly in the Nature commentary, which refers to the difficulty in obtaining ‘informed consent’ when calling for a moratorium on GGE.41

It is not made clear in either piece why the consent of future generations should be seen as vital for decisions involving GGE, but not for other major decisions with long term effects. We cannot obtain the consent of future generations for the development of powerful communication technologies – like smartphones – which will dramatically alter their lives. It would be absurd to claim that we shouldn't develop any risky novel technologies because it ‘affects the next generation without their consent’.

The central question with GGE, as with all interventions that create risks for individuals who cannot consent, is not whether the individuals who would be exposed to the risks would consent to them, but whether they will also (expectably) enjoy benefits that outweigh the risks.

Suppose first that our pursuit of GGE will affect what future people come into existence. Thus, the individuals who will bear the risks of GGE will also exist only because we pursued it. These individuals will enjoy existential benefit from our pursuit of GGE. In rare cases, individuals may also suffer harms from GGE that outweigh these benefits in the sense that we have stronger reason to avoid the harms than to produce the benefits. This would most plausibly be so if GGE causes side‐effects so severe as to make an individual's life not worth living. But provided GGE is sensibly regulated so as to mitigate risks, such cases will be extremely rare. It thus seems reasonable to expect that, collectively, the existential benefits will outweigh the risks.

Now suppose that the individuals who bear the risks of our pursuing GGE would exist even if we did not pursue it. In that case, they will not enjoy an existential benefit. However, many will enjoy concrete person‐affecting health benefits in the form of reduced (risk of) disease. It seems nearly universally accepted that we can benefit people by reducing rates of disease. (This is consistent with how we currently treat people who are unable to offer consent, such as those who are unconscious. We often take it for granted that improving the health of these individuals would benefit them.) Moreover, it is again plausible that, if GGE is sensibly regulated, these benefits will outweigh the risks.

Some believe the important issue is not the consent of future individuals, but rather their autonomy. Habermas believes that the accidental nature of our genetic make‐up is vital for our ability to live as autonomous agents. It is only by having genes given to us by chance, rather than design, that we can ‘grow from nature’ and live autonomously.42 When we alter the genes of future individuals, we thereby undermine their autonomy.43

Habermas's account relies on a distinction between social and natural influences. On his account, what is wrong about genetic modification is that social forces determine our characteristics. By editing the genes of our children we allow social values to determine their heredity, and deprive them of having a genome determined by nature. However, what Habermas's account fails to recognise is that social forces have been affecting our genome for generations. Social ideals of beauty influence mate choice, and thereby directly influence the genetic makeup of the next generation. In addition, many social and cultural developments have changed the human germline in distinctive ways. For example, the development of agriculture led to the widespread selection of genes that allow humans to digest starch and lactose. Our genome has already been influenced by our social life.

It might be argued that there is a morally significant difference between GGE and other social influences on heredity: GGE is intended to influence the genomes of future generations, whereas other social influences are not. It might thus be argued that GGE amounts to the domination, manipulation or control of future generations by present ones, and, on some accounts of autonomy, it thereby reduces their autonomy.44 However, many actions taken by the parents of young children also intentionally influence the lives of those children. They do not do so via altering their genes directly, but it is difficult to see why this should be morally significant; our genes are just one causal influence on our lives. Indeed, some social and environmental influences affect gene expression through epigenetic effects, and these changes may be passed on to the next generation.45 Parenting actions are not normally regarded as significant threats to autonomy merely because they involve the domination, manipulation or control of children by their parents – they are normally regarded as such only when and because parental actions severely constrain the future life choices of their children or harm them directly. In cases where parents act in ways that expand the future life choices of their children, as eliminating a disposition to disease would generally do, this autonomy‐enhancing effect is normally thought to outweigh any restriction on autonomy due to the presence of domination, manipulation or control. It is arguably the presence of disease and disorder, not gene editing to remove them, that presents the greatest threat to future autonomy.46

Thus, even if we accept that GGE in one way reduces the autonomy of future generations, we believe this will often be outweighed by its other autonomy‐increasing effects. Suppose we use GGE to edit out a gene that causes cystic fibrosis, and thereby prevent an individual from suffering this disease. This individual can now live without the fear of the consequences of cystic fibrosis, and will not be impeded by the physical limitations imposed by the disease. Removing this gene promotes the individual's autonomy, and it seems plausible to suppose that this effect outweighs any reduction in autonomy due to the domination, manipulation or control of the individual by prior generations.

3.4. Enhancement
One common concern about GGE is that it will be used a tool of human enhancement and not merely to prevent disease. GGE has much greater capacity to be used as a means of enhancement than conventional selection methods. This is because it can target a large number of genes simultaneously and could be used to insert genes that would not occur naturally. While genetic selection allows selection within the normal human range, gene editing would allow the enhancement of human capacities to supranormal levels.

Many believe that if GGE were used a tool of human enhancement, it could cause widespread social harm. This seems to motivate Marcy Darnovsky, of The Center for Genetics and Society, when she says that ‘creating genetically modified human beings could easily lead to new forms of inequality, discrimination and societal conflict.’47 It is difficult to see how using GE to avoid genetic disease could lead to any of these things.

We have argued elsewhere that arguments against human enhancement face conceptual challenges.48 There are several different ways to understand the term ‘enhancement’, which are often only imprecisely communicated by opponents of enhancement. No commonly offered definitions describe something clearly morally problematic. Further difficulties arise when considering how biological enhancement can be differentiated from non‐biological enhancements, which are nearly universally celebrated.

These issues have been analysed in great detail elsewhere,49 and we do not have space to explore them here.

However, suppose for the sake of argument that biological enhancement is universally problematic. It is doubtful that this would count decisively against permitting and funding the therapeutic use of GGE, or the continuation of GGE research.

Many medical technologies currently being used or developed for the treatment of disease could also be used as enhancements. Many of those who are against the use of these technologies for enhancement purposes are still in favour of pursuing their development and therapeutic uses. Lasik eye surgery, pre‐implantation genetic diagnosis, and plastic surgery can be used non‐therapeutically, but this fact is not considered to provide reasons to prohibit or restrict funding for their therapeutic uses. This is because regulatory tools can be used to limit enhancement uses to such a level that the moral costs of enhancing uses are outweighed by the benefits of therapeutic applications. There is little reason to suppose that the situation would be different for GGE.

Some will argue that the stakes are much higher with GGE than for these other technologies. Furthermore, some are sceptical that regulations could prevent GGE from being used as an enhancement. We concede that if the use of GGE to enhance traits poses a very significant moral risk, and regulations could not limit GGE to therapeutic uses, then there may be a reason to not develop GGE as a clinical tool.50 However, we are aware of no empirical support for the claim that regulations could not also limit GGE to therapeutic applications (as has been the case for PGD) or morally innocuous enhancement applications.

In sum, while some of the arguments presented in this section point to concerns about some specific forms of GGE, and suggest ways we should guide and regulate its development, none count decisively against the pursuit of GGE. As it is impossible to get consent from people who do not yet exist, we cannot reasonably evaluate GGE through the lens of consent from future generations. The risk of germline changes and human enhancement is not unique to GGE, and merely shows that we need to research GGE thoroughly, and carefully regulate any clinical applications. While initial research with GGE may uncover further costs association with its pursuit; at this point, the costs are not clearly high enough to establish that GGE should not even be provisionally pursued.

Go to:
Conclusion
In this article we have shown that GGE research can be conducted safely in ways that carry manageable and reasonable risks. This of course would be moot if the development of GGE carried no benefits. But we have shown that there is a significant medical case for pursuing GGE to combat single gene disorders and polygenic disorders and, importantly, a research case for pursuing this technology to better understand the genesis of disease. The moral case in favour of pursuing GGE is stronger than the case against. This suggests that pursuing GGE is both morally permissible and morally desirable.51

This has direct implications for current policy debates. Given some research with GGE is warranted, we should resist calls for an international ban on all GGE research. Such bans risk depriving us of valuable knowledge about human development, and may deprive future generations of novel disease treatments.

Go to:
Acknowledgements
Julian Savulescu would like to thank the Wellcome Trust (grant number WT104848/Z/14/Z) for its funding. Christopher Gyngell would like to thank the Marie Curie Actions of the European Union's 2014 Horizon 2020 work programme (grant agreement n° 659700) for its funding. Thomas Douglas would like to thank the Uehiro Foundation on Ethics and Education for its funding.

Go to:
Notes
1Puping Liang et al., ‘CRISPR/Cas9‐mediated gene editing in human tripronuclear zygotes’, Protein and Cell 6,5 (2015): 363–372.

2In April 2016, a second study to alter embryonic DNA was reported. Further gene editing research in human embryos has been approved by regulatory bodies in the UK. Ewen Callaway, ‘Second Chinese team reports gene editing in human embryos’, Nature News (2016): doi:10.1038/nature.2016.19718

3Helen Shen, ‘First monkeys with customized mutations born’, Nature News (2014): doi: 10.1038/nature.2014.14611

4Luhan Yang et al., ‘Genome‐wide inactivation of porcine endogenous retroviruses (PERVs)’, Science (2015): doi: 10.1126/science.aad1191

5Qingjian Zou et al., ‘Generation of gene‐target dogs using CRISPR/Cas9 system’, Journal of Molecular Cell Biology (2015): doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjv061

6For the rest of this article when we use the acronym GGE – we are referring to human germline gene editing.

7 International Summit on Human Gene Editing: A Global Discussion. Washington DC, 1‐3 December 2015 (Washington DC: National Academies Press). Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK343651/ (Accessed 22 September 2016).

8Sarah Chan et al., ‘Genome editing technologies and human germline genetic modification: The Hinxton Group consensus statement’, The American Journal of Bioethics 15,12 (2015): 42–7.

9The March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation, March of Dimes Global Report on Birth Defects (New York: White Plains, 2006); John Harris, ‘Germ line modification and the burden of human existence’, The Cambridge Quarterly of Health Care Ethics 25,1 (2016): 6–18.

10BBC News, ‘US “will not fund research for modifying embryo DNA”’. Available at <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-32530334> (Accessed 7 October 2016).

11E. Lanphier et al., ‘Don't edit the human germ line’, Nature 519,7544 (2015): 410–411.

12Human Fertilisation & Embryology Authority, ‘Fertility treatment in 2011′, p. 17. Available at http://www.hfea.gov.uk/docs/HFEA_Fertility_Trends_and_Figures_2011_-_Annual_Register_Report.pdf (Accessed 7 October 2016).

13We assume here that GGE does not induce changes so significant as to alter the identity of the person to which the embryo will give rise.

14See Jeff McMahan, ‘Causing people to exist and saving people's lives’, Journal of Ethics 17 (2013): 5–35; Julian Savulescu, ‘The nature of the moral obligation to select the best children’ in A. Akabayashi (ed.) Future of Bioethics: International Dialogues (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014), pp. 170–182.

15Struan F.A Grant & Hakon Hakonarson, ‘Genome‐wide association studies in type 1 diabetes’, Current Diabetes Reports 9,2 (2009): 157–163.

16J.F. Peden & M. Farrall, ‘Thirty‐five common variants for coronary artery disease: The fruits of much collaborative labour’, Human Molecular Genetics 20,R2 (2011): R198–R205.

17Christine Q. Chang et al., ‘A systematic review of cancer GWAS and candidate gene meta‐analyses reveals limited overlap but similar effect sizes’, European Journal of Human Genetics 22,3 (2013): 402–408.

18Hannah Bourne,Thomas Douglas & Julian Savulescu, ‘Procreative beneficence and in vitro gametogenesis’, Monash Bioethics Review 30,2 (2012): 29–48.

19Xiangjin Kang et al., ‘Introducing precise genetic modifications into human 3PN embryos by CRISPR/Cas‐mediated genome editing’, Journal of Assisted Reproduction and Genetics 33,5 (2016): 581–8.

20Angela L. Rasmussen et al., ‘Host genetic diversity enables Ebola hemorrhagic fever pathogenesis and resistance’, Science 346,6212 (2014): 987–91.

21M. Tabebordbar et al., ‘In vivo gene editing in dystrophic mouse muscle and muscle stem cells’, Science 351,6271 (2016): 407–11.

22For example, see Naoko Irie et al., ‘SOX17 is a critical specifier of human primordial germ cell fate’, Cell 160,1–2 (2015): 253–68.

23D. Mathews, S. Chan, P. Donovan, T. Douglas, C. Gyngell, J. Harris, A. Regenberg & R. Lovell‐Badge, ‘CRISPR: A path through the thicket’, Nature, 527,7577 (2015): 159–161.

24Kazim H Narsinh, Jordan Plews & Joseph C. Wu, ‘Comparison of human induced pluripotent and embryonic stem cells: Fraternal or identical twins?’, Molecular Therapy 19,4 (2011): 635–8; Josipa Bilic & Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte, ‘Concise review: Induced pluripotent stem cells versus embryonic stem cells: close enough or yet too far apart?’, Stem Cells 30,1 (2012): 33–41.

25Marina Riera et al., ‘Comparative study of human embryonic stem cells (hESC) and human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSC) as a treatment for retinal dystrophies’, Molecular Therapy – Methods & Clinical Development 3 (2016): 16010.

26Francis Collins, ‘Statement on NIH funding of research using gene‐editing technologies in human embryos’, 2015. Available at http://www.nih.gov/about/director/04292015_statement_gene_editing_technologies.htm (Accessed 7 October 2016).

27Lanphier et al. op. cit.; D. Baltimore et al., ‘A prudent path forward for genomic engineering and germline gene modification’, Science 348,6230 (2015): 36–38.

28S. Shaw, ‘Research governance: regulating risk and reducing harm?’, Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 99,1 (2006): 14–19.

29Julian Savulescu, ‘The embryonic stem cell lottery and the cannibalization of human beings’, Bioethics 16,6 (2002): 508–529. Whether this counts in favour of GGE will depend on how we understand the supposed moral prohibition on killing human embryos. If we understand this as a deontological side‐constraint, then it may not be possible to justify the killing of embryos now to avoid a greater number of embryo deaths in the future. By contrast, if the prohibition is an implication of a consequence‐based duty to prevent harm, then the prevention of future embryo deaths could justify the causing of embryo deaths now.

30The Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority, Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 2008. Available at: http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2008/22/pdfs/ukpga_20080022_en.pdf (Accessed 7 October 2016).

31J. Kaiser, ‘Gene therapy: Questions remain on cause of death in arthritis trial’, Science 317,5845 (2007): 1665a.

32Julian Savulescu, ‘Harm, ethics committees and the gene therapy death,’ Journal of Medical Ethics 27 (2001): 148–150.

33We discuss issues of consent further in Section 3.3.

34Lanphier et al. op. cit.

35Benjamin P. Kleinstiver et al., ‘High‐fidelity CRISPR–Cas9 nucleases with no detectable genome‐wide off‐target effects’, Nature 529,7587 (2016): 490–5.

36Although this has been suggested that such acts would be justified, See Kevin R Smith, ‘Paternal age bioethics’, Journal of Medical Ethics 41,9 (2015): 775–779.

37C.D. Glen & Y.E. Dubrova, ‘Exposure to anticancer drugs can result in transgenerational genomic instability in mice’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109,8 (2012): 2984–8.

38Chris Gyngell & Thomas Douglas, ‘Stocking the genetic supermarket: Reproductive genetic technologies and collective action problems’, Bioethics 29,4 (2015): 241–250.

39Ibid.

40Collins op. cit.

41Lanphier et al. op. cit.

42Jürgen Habermas, The Future of Human Nature (Cambridge: Polity, 2003).

43For a critical discussion of Habermas's account see: Jonathan Pugh, ‘Autonomy, natality and freedom: A liberal re‐examination of Habermas in the enhancement debate’, Bioethics 29,3 (2014): 145–152.

44Robert Sparrow, ‘Better living through chemistry? A reply to Savulescu and Persson on “Moral Enhancement”’, Journal of Applied Philosophy 31,1 (2014): 23–32.

45M.J Meaney, ‘Maternal care, gene expression, and the transmission of individual differences in stress reactivity across generations,’ Annual Review of Neuroscience 24 (2011): 1161–1192.

46We are assuming here that our pursuit of GGE would not be identity‐affecting for those whose autonomy would allegedly be constrained. If it would, then the putative constraint on autonomy would need to be weighed against an existential benefit, and again, it is plausible that the benefit would be weightier in almost all cases.

47The Center for Genetics and Society, ‘Public interest group calls for strengthening global policies against human germline modification’ [online]. Available at: http://www.geneticsandsociety.org/article.php?id=8528 (Accessed 7 October 2016).

48J. Savulescu, A. Sandberg & G. Kahane, ‘Well‐being and enhancement’, in J. Savulescu, R. ter Meulen & G. Kahane (eds) Enhancing Human Capacities (Oxford: Wiley‐Blackwell, 2011), pp. 3–18; Thomas Douglas, ‘Enhancement, biomedical’ in H. LaFollette (ed.) International Encyclopedia of Ethics (Oxford: Wiley‐Blackwell, 2013); B. Earp, A. Sandberg, G. Kahane & J. Savulescu, ‘When is diminishment a form of enhancement? Rethinking the enhancement debate in biomedical ethics’, Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 8,12 (2014): 1–7; C. Gyngell & M. Selgelid, ‘Human enhancement: Conceptual clarity and moral significance’ in S.Clarke, A Giubilini, J. Savulescu, T. Coady & S. Sanyal (eds) The Ethics of Human Enhancement: Understanding the Debate (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016), pp. 111–126.

49See Allen Buchanan, Dan Brock, Norman Daniels & Daniel Wikler, From Chance To Choice (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000); Leon Kass, Beyond Therapy (New York: Dana Press, 2003); John Harris, Enhancing Evolution (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007); Julian Savulescu & Nick Bostrom, Human Enhancement (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009).

50Note, though, even this wouldn't be a reason against the use of GGE in research.

51It may also imply that pursuing GGE is morally obligatory, for instance, because we are morally obliged to do what we have most moral reason to do. However, we do not argue for this claim here.

OTHER FORMATS
PubReader PDF (104K)
ACTIONS
Cite
Collections
SHARE
     
RESOURCES
Similar articles
Cited by other articles
Links to NCBI Databases
FOLLOW NCBI
Connect with NLM

  
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike
Bethesda, MD 20894

Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure

Help
Accessibility
Careers

NLM
NIH
HHS
USA.gov
Tell us what you think!Close
